---
layout: post
title: The determinant and the Laplacian
---

The __Determinant__ is a measure of how a linear function scales a vector space (_does it get stretched or contracted?_). The __Laplacian__ is a measure of how a gradient field expands/contracts space. These two notions have similar interpretations, yet their equations look different. What is the connection?

## The Determinant

The most intuitive definition of the determinant (in my opinion) is;

$$
\begin{align}
\text{Let } y &= Ax \\
\det(A) &= \prod_{i=0}^n \sigma_i \\
\end{align}
$$

<side>SVD decoposition: any matrix $A$ can be decomposed as $A = USV^T$, where $U, V$ are unitary and $S$ is a diagonal matrix.</side>
assuming you are familiar with [SVD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singular-value_decomposition), you will know that the singular values of the SVD decomposition $\sigma_i$ are the scaling factors applied by the transformation $A$. Thus their product tells us how a unit square would change volume as it is scaled.

## Exterior product

> The exterior algebra Λ(V) of a vector space V over a field K is defined as the quotient algebra of the tensor algebra T(V) by the two-sided ideal I generated by all elements of the form x ⊗ x for x ∈ V.

Good.

$$
\begin{align}
\mathbf u &= u_1e_1 + u_2e_2 \\
\mathbf v &= v_1e_1 + v_2e_2 \\
\mathbf u \wedge \mathbf v &= u_1v_1 (e_1\wedge e_1) + u_2v_1 (e_2\wedge e_1) + u_1v_2 (e_1\wedge e_2) + u_2v_2 (e_2\wedge e_2) \\
&= 0 + (-)u_2v_1(e_1\wedge e_2) + u_1v_2 (e_1\wedge e_2) + 0 \\
&= (u_1v_2 - u_2v_1)(e_1 \wedge e_2) \\
\det ([\mathbf u, \mathbf v]) &= u_1v_2 - u_2v_1 \\
\end{align}
$$

$$
\begin{align}
e_2 \wedge e_1 &= −(e_1 \wedge e_2) \\
e_i \wedge e_i &= 0 \\
\end{align}
$$

(why are these true?)

Awesome. We copied down the math. But what does it really mean?

- A 2-blade space only has 1 dimension $(e_1 \wedge e_2)$. A 3-blade space has 3 dimensions $(e_1 \wedge e_2), (e_2 \wedge e_3), (e_1 \wedge e_3)$. A 4-blade has 6 $(12, 13, 14, 23, 24, 34)$.
-

(oh. kk. it is a generalisation of the determinant to higher dims?!)

## Laplacian

The laplacian of a (continuious fn?) is defined as the divergence of the gradient.

$$
\begin{align}
\text{div}(\nabla f) &= \nabla \cdot \nabla f \\
&= \sum_{i=0}^n \frac{\partial^2 f_i}{\partial x_i^2} \\
\end{align}
$$


## Jacobi's formula

$$
\begin{align}
\frac{d}{dt} \det A(t) &= tr\Big(adj(A(t)) \frac{dA(t)}{dt}\Big)\\
adj(A) &= \det (A) \cdot A^{-1} \\
\frac{d}{dt} \det A(t) &= tr\Big(\det (A) \cdot A^{-1}(t) \cdot \frac{dA(t)}{dt}\Big) \\
\end{align}
$$

## Algebra

If they both cappture the same idea, we expect them to have similar properties;

- associativity
- $op(f) = op(f^T), op(f) = op(f^{-1})$
- $op(f \circ g) = op(f) \circ op(g)$
- ...



## (types of) product

- inner product (similarity)
- outer product (all combinations)
- cross product (?)
- exterior product (?)
- ?? product

how many different types are there?

## Notes

potentially useful?
$$
tr(A) = log(det(exp(A))) \\
$$
Nah. that's just using exp to turn multiplication into summation.

- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Determinant
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exterior_algebra
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Differential_form
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laplace_operator
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacobi%27s_formula
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exterior_derivative
